//
// This contains the translated campaign startpos text.
//

//
// Notes to translators.
//
// i) Only those things between 
// {""} need to be translated.
// and the 
// {""} should be left in.
// (Unless otherwise specified.)
//
//
// ii) If an untranslated string will have 
// (!ENG!) (!FRA!) (!DEU!) 
// (!ITA!) (!ESP!) (!JAP!) 
// (!SCH!) (!TCH!) (!KOR!)
// at the end of the string.
// This is so we can detect untranslated stings
// easily and can see that they have no been 
// translated when the program has been run.
// Once the translation has been done acceptably
// they should be removed.



// iii) The data is organised as follows 
// 
// ["this is a label"]
// {"This is the translation"}
//
// ["This is another label"]
// {"This is another translation"}
// etc

SetShowTransOn  // Do not translate.
//???? Remove when localised.

["StartposData"]  {"StartPos data."}








// Era descriptions

@["Era_Description_EARLY"]
@{"The early medieval period is one of absolute faith, stunning brutality, bottomless greed, pitiless cruelty, venal treachery, rampant warfare, low politics and boundless personal ambition."}
@{"The dark age of warlords is at last passing away in Europe. The successful warlords have inadvertently transformed themselves into feudal nobility and royalty, but a strong sword arm is no longer enough to carve out a petty kingdom, not if you intend to keep it and pass it on to your children. A kingdom is no longer enough when your vassals hold lands for you and serve in your armies in return. More is always needed. But these are not yet nations - loyalties are still personal, rather than to an abstract idea of a nation."}
@{"The feudal system is at heart simple: give military service to a liege lord and in return you gain the income and title to land as his vassal. In turn vassals can give away smaller parcels of land to their followers and so on. Those at the top become immensely powerful: they are knights, barons, counts, dukes, princes and monarchs. The peasants at the bottom are squeezed to supply the fighting men with the necessities and luxuries of life. Great warriors can gain land and followers and become noble through warfare, so they have every incentive to fight. If their king lacks enemies, they can pick their own foes. If they run out of outsiders, they can fight each other. The age of petty warlords may have come to an end, but the age of war certainly hasn't! This constant violence may be one of the reasons why the Pope will demand a Crusade to the Holy Land - perhaps it is better that outsiders suffer rather than fellow Christians!"}
@{"Religion is a central feature of life for nearly everyone, but even now there are places where paganism still holds sway. The Church fights against these old ways, and although the Catholic and Orthodox churches have drifted apart, they are both immensely powerful. The Orthodox Church is almost an arm of government for the Byzantine Empire, supporting the Emperor and doing his bidding. The Catholic Pope, however, claims the power to make and break Catholic emperors and kings. This has already caused tensions as kings and popes have fought over points of protocol and administrative procedure. Kings want to control the Church within their lands; the Church claims the authority of God to decide who can be a king, and is more than willing to excommunicate those who go against it. In the face of heretics and infidels, however, Church and royalty are as one. Heresy threatens the established order of things; the Muslims seem to threaten everything! And fearful people lash out at their perceived enemies; they crusade to "rescue" their holy sites from unbelievers."}
@{"Islam is, perhaps, drawing its breath after headlong expansion, but it remains the repository of learning: chemistry, astronomy, mathematics, philosophy, theological debate, poetry, music and high art. In short, Islam is the home of civilization. From Cordoba in Spain to Cairo, Jerusalem and Baghdad, the Islamic sultans and khalifah allow their subjects a surprising (to outsiders) freedom of worship and they encourage learning. But there is no reason to suppose that the so-far irresistible march of Islam has stopped, and the Islamic princes are ready to defend what is, by right of possession, their land. In the east, the Seljuk Turks have ambitions to rule even more of the world."}
@{"In the Byzantine Empire plots and counterplots, treacheries and assassinations go on as they have done for five centuries and more. The winner of these internecine struggles sits upon the throne; the losers are blinded, castrated, exiled or, in the case of the lucky ones, killed outright. "Byzantine" has become a byword for dark and complex intrigue, and with good reason. In Constantinople, the Emperors have their own motives for wanting aid from the knights of the west, motives that have little to do with "rescuing" holy places and much to do with defending their own lands and power from the threat from more vigorous peoples."}


@["Era_Description_HIGH"]
@{"By 1200 the nations of Europe and the Mediterranean are beginning to emerge in the dynastic struggles between the continent's ruling families, although the borders of these nations are still subject to "debate" at the point of a sword. Kingdoms are usually the motley collection of lands that a king can hold by force of arms, their borders shifting thanks to claim and counter-claim, driven by inheritance and constant warfare. New empires are rising, and others are starting their long slide into obscurity and defeat."}
@{"This is the era of courtly love, the favourite subject of the troubadours and minstrels. It is a time of tournaments and chivalry, when knights can win great fame and wealth through personal valour, but it is sometimes difficult to tell the difference between a tournament and a small pitched battle! It is also a time when the acts of the great and the good often fall well short of the ideals of courtly love and chivalry. War, even more than arranged marriages and cunning diplomacy, is still the way to win and keep a domain."}
@{"In the west, kings and princes still dream of liberating the Holy Land and "saving" the holy places of Christianity, even though most Islamic princes are tolerant enough to allow genuine pilgrimages. This access is not extended to armed mobs under the command of charismatic, ambitious and utterly unscrupulous men, all loudly proclaiming their loyalty to a cause that may already be lost. In the meantime, the Christian princes' struggles against each other, their plotting and their endless warfare, have prompted the Church to declare Days of Peace: a day each week when Christians are supposed to stop fighting fellow Christians. These Days of Peace have been ignored and the fighting has gone on much as before. At the Lateran Council the Church has tried to ban anyone using crossbows in warfare. The ban has failed."}
@{"In Spain the Christians have sometimes stopped fighting each other, but only so that they can attack their common enemies, the Moorish Almohad princes. They have been successful, but it has been a slow business taking lands and then extirpating all traces of a people, their culture and their religion, while still maintaining old rivalries against fellow Christians. The Almohads are retrenching, but they are still a formidable threat."}
@{"In the east, dukes and princes battle to establish new dynasties and kingdoms among the remnants of old ones and on the plains that stretch endlessly to the east. And they watch for the coming of the fearsome steppe warriors - another wave of invaders terrible enough to have ridden from the depths of Hell itself! After all, Attila came from the same steppes... Even the prayers of both Orthodox and Catholic clergy seem futile against such foes!"}
@{"The Catholic Church has been thwarted in its ambition to be the sole kingmaker in Christian lands. Instead, it has turned with ferocity on heretics and unbelievers within Christianity's borders. Theological debate about the poverty of Christ, the wealth of the Church itself, or small points of dogma can lead those involved in the argument to the purging fires of a heretic's stake! The Church now has a new weapon at its disposal in this struggle: the Inquisition, a secret religious police for rooting out incorrect thought and punishing those doing the thinking. The Church still has its old weapon, the call to arms for a Crusade, but now this power is aimed at heretics and pagans in Europe, as well as its "traditional" Islamic targets. The Church has become embroiled in politics, particularly within the Holy Roman Empire, as Church support can make the difference to any Emperor's achievements (but always at a price!). In the same way, the Emperor often wants a friendly Pope, meaning that interference in the Church's business is the order of the day."}
@{"The Byzantine Empire faces many threats. Constantinople may still be the greatest city in the world, but its power is beginning to look hollow. The Empire, however, has lasted centuries and its rulers have become masters of survival in the face of adversity: Emperors always find the means to hold on. The Turks show no signs of losing their combativeness, and now rule only a few days' ride from Constantinople. The Holy Land - once part of the Empire - has been lost again. Now it belongs to the Egyptian Sultanate, and years after his death the name of the great "Saladin" still strikes terror into Christian hearts!"}


@["Era_Description_LATE"]
@{"By the 1320's, many of the animosities of Europe are now fixed ideas. Enemies have been made and repeatedly fought. The French and English have spent so long at war with each other that the dynastic hatreds and rivalries have been transformed into instinctive national loathing in both countries. Raid, pillage and plunder are now as much a part of this struggle as open battle. England has also settled into its long rivalry with Scotland. These hatreds are still to be played out, and there are no guaranteed winners and losers."}
@{"There is still no such thing as modern "Germany" but the Germans are the dominant people of the Holy Roman Empire. Indeed, the Empire and Germany are almost the same, and the Teutonic Knights are only one of the Imperial forces pushing to the east, into Lithuania, Poland and pagan Prussia. The Italians and the Spanish have still to achieve nationhood, but they are fighting hard to maintain their respective identities and independence against all comers. Their cultures are wealthy, vibrant and confident, even in the midst of war."}
@{"Princes still propose Crusades to free the Holy Land, but to curry favour with the Church rather than actually carry out such a military venture. The crusading orders of knighthood have pulled out of the east and, without fuss, dedicated themselves to other tasks. The Knights Templar, however, are no more; they have been forcibly disbanded, accused of heresy, and executed for their "crimes". Apart from assaults on pagans and heretics, the great Age of Crusades appears to be drawing to a close, other than as a convenient rallying cry. Western Europe may have become resigned to the idea that military power will not free the Holy Land from Islamic princes, but it has not lost its Church-inspired hostility towards those same Islamic rulers. Even so, reality is recognised and ambassadors from Christian kings visit Muslim courts."}
@{"Europe is a changing place. Thanks to growing trade and a rising population, it is wealthier than it has been since the time of the Romans. This growing wealth is financing magnificent cathedrals throughout the Christian world, and innumerable superb churches in Italy and beyond. The same wealth is allowing the growth of a merchant class with aspirations that are not tied solely to owning land - the old feudal order is being challenged by new money in the new towns and cities. Learning is valued again in the new universities dotted across the continent, although the Church carefully controls many of them."}
@{"The Catholic Church itself is still a force in everyday life, although it has also become deeply involved in dynastic politics. Both the French and Imperial rulers have made a point of interfering in papal elections in the hope of gaining political advantage. There are those who argue against the power and wealth of the Papacy, but they do so carefully. The Inquisition is powerful, especially so in Spain where it roots out insincere converts who, it is believed, might betray the land to its former Islamic rulers."}
@{"The Islamic world seems to have 'paused for breath'. The shock of losing Baghdad and its Khalifah to the Mongols, though a generation or more ago, seems to have caused a loss of some confidence. On the western margins of Islam, the Almohads are in slow retreat before the Catholic armies of Spain, fighting to keep what has been theirs against the tide of battle. In Egypt, the ruling dynasty - dominated by Mamluk slave warriors - has lost its taste for a cultural life and become militaristic. The Turks still press hard against Byzantium's shrinking frontiers, and show no signs of wishing to leave the Byzantine Empire to expire on its own."}
@{"The Byzantine Empire is a shadow of its former self, yet still with power enough to make mischief, still with wealth enough to be desirable. The Imperial court in Constantinople behaves much as it has always done: plotting while ignoring the gathering storm outside the walls. The Empire's death is, however, not inevitable as wealth can always be translated into military power. The Orthodox Church is in retreat in the former provinces of the Empire, brushed aside by the Islamic faith of the Turks. Elsewhere Orthodoxy is growing in strength, as the armies of the Russian princes are holding the line against the barbarians and pagans from the eastern steppes, even if this is only on the sufferance of the Mongol hordes. These same Russian armies bring greater glories to the princes of Novgorod and Kiev and allow them to establish new holdings on the steppes."}



// Faction descriptions - Early Era

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ALMOHAD_EARLY"]
@{"Coming from a nomadic desert people, the Berber tribesmen of the Almoravid and Almohad dynasties conquered North Africa and then, at the request of the Iberian Muslim princes, came to Spain to protect Islam. In the process, they took Spain for themselves. When the Almoravids abandoned their simple lifestyle in favour of the comfort and luxury of sophisticated city life, the Almohads turned their backs on such lax and easy living, and in doing so sealed the fate of the Almoravids. They were overthrown."}
@{"The Almohad Caliphate now stretches along North Africa and into Spain. The Khalifah's rule to date has been hard, uncompromising and very successful. The Almohads get little love from the Christians and Jews that they rule, as earlier liberal attitudes towards both groups have been abandoned, but this lack of loyalty has had little impact. The Almohads have some remarkable strengths as rulers: their military prowess is superb, their religiously inspired troops have few equals, and they feel little fear of the resurgent Christian Spanish in Castile. They hold down an unenthusiastic population and still manage to mount major military expeditions. But this unpopularity could also be a weakness - constant vigilance in the face of disaffected people can be tiring for any regime."}
@{"The Caliphate's rulers are, however, better placed to carry their conquests further into Christian Europe than any other Islamic power. They stand ready to wear down Spain, if not crush it outright. A weakened France could then be their next target, swinging south into Italy or north towards the rich pickings of England's continental holdings. Holding off Spanish aggression, should it come, would also give them the chance to attack in the Mediterranean, towards Egypt and then the Holy Land."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_BYZANTINE_EARLY"]
@{"The Byzantine Empire is the child of the Roman Empire, or rather the Greek-speaking eastern half of the Roman Empire. It has always been a power in the world, ruled by despots and assassins, fools and wise men, poets and generals - all combining religious and political authority in one man. That it has survived and even prospered is a tribute to its underlying strengths, and the luck of the Empire's position at the crossroads of the world. Almost no trade moves east or west without making Byzantium richer and filling the Emperor's coffers with taxes. This wealth and the heavy tolls needed to sustain the Imperial court can be a cause of envy and resentment from other peoples."}
@{"Constantinople or Byzantium was founded as the second Rome by Constantine the Great, and is the greatest city in Europe and may be the greatest in the world. Its walls are impregnable, its armies fearsome, its people impossibly wealthy and cultured. Byzantine coinage effortlessly dominates the world of trade and can be used to buy goods the world over. In matters of religion, the Byzantine patriarchs are unwilling to recognise the Papacy's claim to superior status, as the schism between the Orthodox and Catholic halves of Christianity goes unhealed."}
@{"Byzantium, however, does face problems, yet within those problems could be opportunities for further greatness. The Empire has had a measure of security thanks to the skills of its mercenary armies, and has held on to many of its ancient frontiers even in the face of Islamic expansion. Now, while the troops remain as good as ever, a new threat has arisen in the East. A good Emperor will need to concentrate much of his military might - including the fearsome kataphraktoi against the emerging threat of the Seljuk Turks. At the same time, he must also be aware of other opportunities: the Balkans, the Holy Land and North Africa. A maritime strategy controlling the Mediterranean can pay dividends. Finding common cause with one of the Catholic princes of the west is also, for example, a viable strategy, as neither side will necessarily want to eventually conquer the same territory. And an Emperor who can harness the power of western Crusaders can also profit from their work in weakening his enemies."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_DANISH_EARLY"]
@{"The Kingdom of Denmark is not a playable faction during this period of the game."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_EGYPTIAN_EARLY"]
@{"The ruling Islamic, Fatimid dynasty in Egypt has been blessed in many ways. The heartland of the their domain remains as rich and fertile as ever, thanks to yearly flooding by the renewing Nile. The great cities along the riverbanks are some of the most sophisticated, wealthy and vibrant in the Known World. This is partly due to the Greek and Roman culture that the Fatamids inherited, but it has been transformed by their Arabic influence into something richer: a truly enlightened and erudite culture."}
@{"The Islamic rulers of Egypt are also tolerant to a degree not seen elsewhere: Jews, Orthodox Christians, Coptic Christians and many other sects are allowed to worship as they will, although they are excluded from certain government posts. This gives the dynasty an underlying strength and popularity that stands it in good stead to meet the future."}
@{"Egypt does face external threats, but should be well placed to meet them. There is an expansionist tendency in western, Catholic Christianity that could lead to trouble.  Future Islamic control of the eastern Mediterranean could be challenged, and this has long been encouraged by the Byzantine Empire to the north. There is always the chance that the Byzantine Empire will seek to re-establish direct control over its former possessions. In addition, the Almohads to the west do not demonstrate the friendliness that should become fellow Muslims, and the same is sometimes true of the Turks in the near east. Providing that each of these challenges can be met, there is plenty to look forward to as a ruler of Egypt - the wealth of the Mediterranean and Islamic worlds is there for the taking!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ENGLISH_EARLY"]
@{"By 1087 England is, for the most part, firmly in the control of its Norman overlords. The King, his courtiers and the great lords are all French-speaking Normans, and most hold lands on both sides of the English Channel. England is only one part of a larger, Norman domain but is increasingly wealthy due to the wool trade. The King's holdings in France, it has to be said, are far more valuable than his English provinces."}
@{"This basic position on both a defensible island and on the continent brings opportunities and problems for an English King. The kingdom is sprawling and not always easy to defend at every point. There are also political considerations: thanks to ancient oaths of fealty, the English King is nominally a vassal of the French King. This status is ignored by English Kings as a matter of course, but is a bone of contention with France. The English ambition to gain land and power at the expense of France is another issue in the two nations' intertwined histories. The English kings are, of course, Catholic, but they are not above struggles with Rome over who controls the Church in England, a struggle that has still to be played out to a conclusion. That said, the Kings of England are largely pious and god-fearing."}
@{"As always, when looking to expand, the English must look both close to home and across the seas to France. With holdings in France an attack there can look tempting, but any English ruler who doesn't keep an eye on Scotland at the same time is asking for trouble. Scotland, Wales and Ireland can be subdued first, but it is likely to be at a high cost in blood and treasure. In turn, this risks an attack by the French. And once conquered, new lands will need to be firmly occupied. All that said, the English have Norman vigour and a growing sense of national identity to bind them together under a strong war leader. They have the potential to flower into a great western empire."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_FRENCH_EARLY"]
@{"At first glance, the position of the French King looks unenviable. His centre of power around Paris and the Ile-de-France looks small and vulnerable, and the great nobles often openly flout his authority. That these great nobles also nominally include the King of England is no comfort either. In French eyes, the English Kings may be vassals in France, but in fact they act like unwelcome masters in much of the land. The King of France has no real authority in what should be his own domain where the English are concerned. Sooner or later, this problem will have to be addressed and settled once and for all."}
@{"Until then, France must contend with a potentially aggressive neighbour to the north, the Holy Roman Empire to the east, the relatively weak Christian kingdoms of Spain to the south, and Italy. After the English, the Holy Roman Empire is the greatest rival, particularly if the Emperor harbours ambitions of conquering Italy. If possible, expansion into northern Italy represents a good way of securing French glory and thwarts Imperial ambitions. This is particularly true if relations with the Catholic Church become strained. A French army in Rome is a powerful argument when dealing with the Papacy, but provokes religious discontent by its presence."}
@{"If all this paints a bleak picture of French prospects, things are not quite as bad as they appear. France is a very rich country and can have more-than-ample resources to draw upon. Once the French king has spent wisely and secured his heartlands, an enemy could have a difficult time in taking them, especially against the flower of French knighthood. And when waging a war of aggression, France has the same advantages: in honour and nobility, those same French knights are the envy of the world! Above all, France must avoid expansion (and therefore warfare) in too many places at the same time. War against the English must not allow the Empire to nibble away at French possessions, and vice versa. France has the power to prosper mightily, but only when this power is used carefully."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_GERMAN_EARLY"]
@{"Although apparently surrounded by rivals and subject to internal dissent, the Holy Roman Empire is not the weakling power it might seem. The Emperor is the overlord - for the most part - of vast tracts of Germany and beyond, but his need to keep dissent and disloyalty under control can be a limitation on his power. Few within the Empire feel loyalty to anything beyond their immediate locality, making effective Imperial government almost the same as Imperial military occupation. Added to this is a rivalry with the Pope over who holds the ultimate authority within the Empire: Emperors have created their own Popes and then been excommunicated by the same men!"}
@{"If, however, the Emperor succeeds in keeping his provinces in line, his powers for further conquest are formidable indeed. Any new lands he takes only add to his power and can, with careful management, eventually be more loyal to the idea of 'the Empire' than the older Imperial provinces inside Germany."}
@{"A drive to the east against Poland can give easy pickings providing care is taken. The Poles can have problems of their own on their eastern frontiers, and judicious pressure from Germany can yield real gains. A move to the southeast is possible, into the Balkans and towards the Black Sea, brushing aside or absorbing the petty kingdoms there. To the south, the rich provinces of the Italian peninsular are a temptation with an additional bonus in controlling Rome and thus influencing the Papacy, although this has the risk of causing religious unrest. To the west, the French are often distracted by their wars with England. The Empire, however, needs to avoid war against more than one opponent at a time. A central position may allow the Emperor to strike out in any direction, but he can also be attacked anywhere along his borders."}
@{"Finally, no Emperor should overlook the possibilities for power presented by a Crusade when the Pope calls for one. Who is to say what lands might be available in the wake of such an endeavour?"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ITALIAN_EARLY"]
@{"The Italians are blessed with rich lands, industry and wealth from trade besides. Much of Europe's wealth flows into Italy and the coffers of the Pope, and much of his wealth then flows out into the hands of Italian merchants. All of this gives Italy's rulers a chance to become great, for as the Roman writer Cicero put it: "nervos belli, pecuniam infinitam" (the sinews of war, unlimited money). They are also blessed with a warlike and adventurous nature, which can make them a difficult people to rule at times. There is also the ever-present problem of Rome and the Papacy: religion and religious feeling can work both for and against rulers."}
@{"Opportunities come in many guises for a bold Italian ruler. To the northwest the French hold on their southern provinces is not always as secure as the northern French kings would wish; religious and secular differences can mean that France has problems with its own people even while it is struggling against English expansionism. To the north, Imperial power can slip or fail. To the east, the Balkans can be a tempting potential empire for Italy. And there is always the prospect of becoming a naval power. Perhaps, in the long term, domination of the Mediterranean offers the best chance of Italian supremacy. True, the great powers of the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic kingdoms will have to be challenged for naval and mercantile supremacy. With the wealth of Mediterranean trade at his disposal and his home provinces secured, any Italian ruler should be able to expand his holdings."}
@{"All of these strategies have their risks. The same wealth that helps Italy also makes it an attractive target to others. Both the French King and the Emperor may not be able to resist meddling in Italy, or even mounting a full-scale invasion. Competing at sea means taking power that the Byzantines may consider to be rightfully theirs, or may weaken the Byzantines so that they no longer form a bulwark against future Islamic expansion. But if Italy benefits from all these machinations and from a Crusade or two..."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_POLISH_EARLY"]
@{"In the last century Poland has profited from the weakness of its neighbours and its strong relationship with the Empire and the Papacy, even though it is only a little over 100 years since Christianity became the religion of its rulers and the pagan ways were abandoned. Polish Grand Dukes swore fealty to the Empire and even made their country subordinate to the Pope in the recent past. Polish military strength has now brought about a break with the Empire, and the independent Polish kings rule in their own right. The borders of the kingdom of Poland are not, however, set in stone - both opportunity and danger wait on all sides."}
@{"There is opportunity all around in the petty principalities and dukedoms that owe allegiance to no strong central kingdom, and in the lands of the lesser kingdoms too. With no central authority, these smaller powers can easily fall before an aggressive, organised attack, and a cunning Polish King can take advantage of his smaller neighbours' weaknesses. Even the sanction of Mother Church can be relied upon at times for these actions, as there are still many places where pagans can be found, their souls ripe for salvation through conquest. To the east and northeast the people are fierce, but not so organised as in the west. To the west, the pickings are richer but the risks are greater, especially as this is likely to bring Poland into direct competition with Imperial power in central Germany."}
@{"And Imperial power can be a problem, especially any Imperial plans for expansion if the Emperor is checked or chooses not to move south or westwards. A wise Polish ruler will realise that he may not be able to defeat the Empire, but he can certainly make it too expensive in blood and treasure for the Imperial army to advance into Poland or keep what it takes for very long."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_RUSSIAN_EARLY"]
@{"The Principality of Russia is not a playable faction when using this starting date."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_SPANISH_EARLY"]
@{"The Christian kings of Spain are not the only claimants to the lands south of the Pyrenees. The Islamic rulers of the Almohad Caliphate possess much of the peninsular, and are seen as blood enemies by the Spanish. Almost driven from their lands by the Almohads, the Spanish have clung grimly to their remaining provinces and fought back. The defence of Christian Spain has become a holy cause, as the Spanish see themselves as the defenders of Christendom in the west. Even so, they face a great and powerful enemy in the Almohads and one that is, by many standards, a good deal more advanced and civilized than they."}
@{"The defeat of the Almohad Caliphate must be the priority for any Spanish King. Unless the Almohads are driven from Spanish soil, they will always be a threat, just by their presence. Peaceful co-existence may be possible for a while, but long term it is an illusion. Catholic Spain and Islamic Spain want the same lands and the same souls, and the Catholic Kings of Spain should be in no mood for compromise. To date, they have not been able to afford the luxury of tolerance, and are unlikely to be able to do so in future. The Spanish can harness their vigorous faith in pursuit of victory, but the Almohads will have to be worn down on many battlefields to secure a Spanish homeland. If this is not done too many resources and men will have to be committed to defensive garrisons to allow new conquests to be made."}
@{"Bringing all of Spain back into the Catholic fold may be greatness enough for some but once it is done further expansion is possible. Any invasion into southern France is across rugged and inhospitable terrain, and will require a Spanish King's undivided attention, but with experienced troops it could be done. It could also be advantageous for Spain if the French and English have already bled each other dry too."}
@{"The Spanish rarely have military power to spare for Crusades towards the east and the Holy Land unless they have defeated the Islamic princes closer to home. But Crusades can also be a powerful tool in this domestic struggle; a mighty weapon indeed, but the consequences of a Crusade can also be terrible and unpredictable."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_TURKISH_EARLY"]
@{"The Turks are a warlike people, and justifiably proud of their martial skills. Once steppe warriors in the service of Muslim princes further to the east, they have now become Muslim princes themselves thanks to these same war skills. They have carved out a sultanate that not only challenges the power of Byzantium but also dominates the approaches to the Holy Land and the valuable trade routes through the Levant. This rise to power has not been without its internal conflicts, but succession crises have been weathered and the Turkish sultanate has always emerged the stronger. The Turkish position is enviable and ripe for expansion, but it is not without attendant risks."}
@{"Firstly, the Orthodox Christians of the Byzantine Empire can represent Islamic Turkish expansion as not just a threat to their own power and prestige, but as an attack on Jerusalem, the destination for Christian pilgrims. This can bring western adventurers and Crusaders to the Middle East, intent on destroying Turkish power. Secondly, there is Byzantium itself. Although the Empire has been in decline, there is nothing to say that it must remain so. An able Byzantine Emperor could easily marshal enough resources to attack and defeat the Turks! A wise Sultan keeps his armies ready for war, even when not contemplating immediate expansion."}
@{"But the potential is there: the rich and tempting provinces of the Byzantine Empire are now vulnerable to attack after long years of decadence, and beyond them is the greatest prize of all: the city of Constantinople and its untold riches. Beyond that are the petty principalities of the Balkans. A Turkish Sultan could one day rule his own lands and much of Europe too! The Holy Land and far-off Egypt also beckon, if the fury of the Christian, Catholic west (as their holy places are conquered or threatened) can be withstood."}



// Faction descriptions - High Era

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ALMOHAD_HIGH"]
@{"The Almohad Caliphate includes North African coastal lands and a large part of the Spanish peninsula. Coming from a desert people, the Berber tribesmen of the Almohad dynasty conquered North Africa and then took Spain from its Islamic princes while supposedly helping them. The Almohads never enjoyed lax morality and easy living, and so have ruled their lands with a rod of iron. The Khalifah's rule has kept his subject Christians and Jews under control, although this is now just as much a reflection of the intolerant attitudes shown by the Kings of Spain towards their Islamic and Jewish subjects."}
@{"Catholic strength in Spain is a problem that needs addressing by the Almohads. Their domain has always been the target for the Spanish who are intolerant of Islam, and they have been slowly driven south. As a consequence, Almohad policy must be a concentration of effort against further Spanish attacks. Unless the Spanish are checked there can be no revival in Almohad fortunes, as the Iberian peninsular provinces are the richest in their empire. The Almohads still have considerable strength: their government is efficient; their military skills are formidable; and their troops have few equals in open battle when handled well, being as fanatical and brave as any Christian "crusader"."}
@{"If the Almohads rise to meet the immediate challenges they face, then they can be a power in the Mediterranean world and beyond. The Spanish are not unbeatable (their own internal problems are great), and beyond them the French and English are still at each other's throats. Both the Christian provinces of Spain and the southern lands of France present rich pickings, and simply reaching the Pyrenees would give the Khalifah's armies a natural defensive line to hold. Across the sea, the southern Italian provinces could also be rich targets, although a direct threat to Rome could unite Catholic forces. Along the north African coast, Egyptian lands may also be vulnerable as the rulers of Egypt are likely to be distracted by Crusaders in the Holy Lands and the possibility of a resurgent Byzantine Empire."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_BYZANTINE_HIGH"]
@{"In the last 100 years or so, the Byzantine Empire has seen its power and influence slowly decline. By the standards of any other Christian land, Byzantium is still fabulously rich, its people heirs to the imperial greatness of Rome. But disaster has struck in the last year: Constantinople has fallen to a so-called crusader army, made up of ambitious and greedy men who should have been fighting Byzantium's enemies. Instead, they took the city as their own, installed a usurping "Latin Emperor", and the rightful Emperor now lives in exile!"}
@{"Although much wealth was plundered when Constantinople was taken, what is left to the Empire still attracts the envy of others. Trade has enriched the Imperial coffers with taxes and bribes, and Byzantine coinage remains universally acceptable. Constantinople (or Byzantium) itself, founded as the second Rome by Constantine the Great, is still the greatest city in Europe, even under the false Latin Emperor. Its walls still look impregnable, the people almost impossibly wealthy and cultured."}
@{"The Byzantine Empire has its share of other problems, beyond simply losing the capital city. Its mercenary armies are no longer quite as formidable as they were and are expensive, but they provide a measure of security. Its ancient frontiers have been broken and overrun, but there is still some maritime greatness. Crusaders from the west have not added to the security of the Empire - they are little better than pillaging barbarians, even if they have diverted Islamic attentions away from the Byzantines. The Pope in Rome and the Byzantine patriarchs are still at loggerheads, however, even in the face of Islamic expansionism."}
@{"From the east and south, the Turkish and Arabic powers threaten to take still more territory. But there is now the possibility of allying with one of the Islamic powers that do not see eye-to-eye on many matters, and using them to strike down their fellow Muslims. All that said, the apparent Byzantine weakness hides an inner strength and a will to survive and thrive. The Empire need not fail, as long as it is under the command of the right Emperor."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_DANISH_HIGH"]
@{"The lands of the north are bleak and uncompromising, but they have always produced superlative fighting men. The Vikings, the Normans, the Rus and even the Varangian Guard in far-off Byzantium are all Norsemen of one sort or another. As navigators, traders and warriors, Norsemen have few rivals in the world, although their raiding voyages are now nearly at an end. Denmark is established as the strongest of the Scandinavian kingdoms, having crushed the pagan Wends in northern Germany and their own pagans in the wilder lands to the north. The kings of Denmark have also cleverly avoided being absorbed into the Empire as just one more province, even though they have had Imperial support in the past."}
@{"With a partly secure power base, the Danes can do well if they avoid being overrun by Imperial forces outside Scandinavia. Their position at the mouth of the Baltic makes development as a maritime power an attractive, and possibly vital, option. If the Baltic can be controlled, then Danish armies can move at will to any point along the coast, creating enclaves of Danish power to the east. The smaller, independent duchies and principalities can be picked off and then used to expand Danish power further along the northern periphery of Eastern Europe. This may be a continuation of the Viking era, but the intention is to hold what is invaded rather than simply despoil the land. It can bring a Danish ruler into competition with Poland, Russia and the Empire, as these kingdoms may be trying to acquire the same lands on the Baltic coast. Southern expansion into the rich provinces of central and western Germany is also an option for a strong Danish ruler, but one that must be carefully timed to avoid an Imperial backlash. It is a strategy that works well when Imperial authority has collapsed, as the resources of an angered Emperor are likely to be great indeed."}
@{"Finally, it is only two centuries ago that Danish rulers could also claim the kingship of England, before the coming of the Norman overlords (descendants of Vikings themselves) who now rule there. Perhaps these old claims could be renewed, and a new maritime kingdom across the Northern seas could be created. Wherever a ship can go there could be a way for the Danish to make a profit - or a killing!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_EGYPTIAN_HIGH"]
@{"The Islamic rulers of Egypt have been blessed like the Pharaohs of old by the Nile, which makes the heartland of their domains a rich and fertile place. The great cities of the Nile valley are some of the oldest, most sophisticated and wealthy in the world, thanks in part to the survival of Greek and Roman culture. This learning, however, has been transformed into a distinctly enlightened Arabic form by the influence of ideas from Baghdad and further east. Merchants of all kinds have travelled the same routes as knowledge, and brought back wealth too."}
@{"Until recently, the Egyptian sultans were very tolerant rulers, but they are becoming more militaristic in their outlook. Orthodox Christians, Jews, Coptic Christians, even Catholics and Christian heretic sects are allowed to worship as they wish, but are excluded almost without exception from power. This gives the domain an underlying strength and unity in its Islamic government that stands it in good stead to meet the future. They have a powerful army, including Mamluk slave warriors, and it is a force with few equals in the Christian world where battlefield discipline is concerned."}
@{"External threats and opportunities are two sides of the same coin. There are still the Catholic powers to be concerned about, disguised as their ambitions may be by a veneer of religion. The Almohads to the west are under pressure in Spain and may yet abandon their European lands; and cornered men are often at their most dangerous, striking out at anyone near at hand. Egypt may be vulnerable to an attack along the North African coast. The Turks continue to press forwards, and may choose to advance towards Cairo rather than Constantinople, so then an alliance with the Byzantine Empire could prove profitable. And across the Mediterranean in southern Europe, Italian factionalism presents an opportunity to snatch new lands, alongside the threat of a new maritime power. Providing that each of these challenges can be met, there is plenty to look forward to as a ruler of Egypt - the wealth of the Mediterranean and much of the Islamic world is there for the taking!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ENGLISH_HIGH"]
@{"In 1205 England is a land with potential greatness, but one that has suffered hard knocks in the previous decades and seen its power diminished. The English still have the potential to become a great continental power, uniting the home islands and France beneath a single crown. This almost came about under Henry II fifty years ago, but since then his Angevin empire has been divided and lost."}
@{"England has become an island nation, but a potentially wealthy one (English wealth is based almost exclusively on its unglamorous but profitable wool trade). The fearsome Welsh longbow has begun to make its contribution to English armies too. The overseas holdings of the English Kings are much reduced, lost to the French in a series of disastrous bargains, wars and acts of foolishness. At one point almost masters in France, the English have been on the defensive for generations, holding on to the last valuable lands they own."}
@{"However, the English are now the master in their island home. The Welsh have been subdued, if not yet crushed; Wales still needs strong garrisons. Ireland too is an English possession, although this too needs a formidable garrison. The Scots can be contained, probably, and permanent conquest of Scotland (or dynastic chicanery to achieve the same ends) remains an English ambition, and one that could be fulfilled with sufficient effort."}
@{"Looking abroad, there are the lost French lands of the Angevin kings to re-conquer. The kingdom of France may now rule much of France, but any English king could - and should - make a good claim to rule on French soil. The few lands in France that remain are valuable in themselves, but also offer a toehold to launch an attack to retake what is rightfully English! And once conquered, these lands will need garrisons to protect them from inevitable French reprisals. This struggle for dominance with the French will need to be uppermost in any English ruler's mind, and guide his choice of allies in both the short and long term."}
@{"Overall, the English still represent a credible force in the race to become a power in western Christendom."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_FRENCH_HIGH"]
@{"The star of French kings is definitely in the ascendant. They have done much in the last century to make France strong, and to secure her borders against foreign aggression. Thanks to English carelessness (and the power of French armies) some of the lands that had English overlords are now back in French hands. The French nobility are still intractable and wilful, of course, and flout the King's authority at every opportunity, but the King's position is strong, his treasury wealthy and his prospects better than they have ever been."}
@{"The English, of course, still see much of France as their property and still want to be masters of the realm. The French must contend with this aggressive neighbour to the north, but can counter the English by conducting invasions of their own - the English cannot be strong everywhere! To the east, the Holy Roman Empire is less of a threat than it used to be, perhaps, as opportunities exist for an Imperial move eastwards rather than into France. Expansion into northern Italy still represents a good way of securing French glory, and may also thwart Imperial ambitions in that direction - and damage the Italians too! To the south, the Spanish are likely to be pre-occupied with their wars against the Almohads. The French do have some of the finest knights in the world at their disposal, but more than great valour may be required to win new glory for the crown!"}
@{"This all paints a rosy picture of French strengths and prospects, but a wise ruler knows to allow for contingencies. Spending wisely to secure what is already French is always a good strategy before mounting any expedition to take new lands. Religious differences can tear a realm apart as surely as any others, and the French need to be aware of this, as heresy is a cancer if not cut out. The Catholic Church, not always the easiest of allies, needs to be appeased or controlled, so the power and benefits of a Crusade are also things that a French monarch should bear in mind."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_GERMAN_HIGH"]
@{"Surrounded by rivals and subject to internal dissent, the Holy Roman Empire sometimes appears weak, a realm held together only by the most fragile of bonds. No one within the Empire really thinks of themselves as Imperial subjects - their loyalties are to the principality, the duchy, the free city, or even the village where they live. The Holy Roman Empire seems an ideal in the minds of men more than a physical reality, and in the hands of a weak leader it is sometimes barely this much. But under a strong Emperor, Imperial power can be awesome. The magnates can be forced to bow to Imperial authority, and once dissent and disloyalty are controlled great things can be achieved. The Empire can be held together by force of will and force of arms, and it can be made greater still by both of these."}
@{"Above all other strategic considerations, the Emperor must avoid war against more than one opponent at a time. His central position in Europe may allow attacks in any direction, and the Empire can be strongly defended against counterattacks, but a surrounded man is still surrounded, no matter how great his strength. Imperial power needs to be used against one opponent at a time, and Imperial diplomacy should be aimed at making sure enemies do not act in concert."}
@{"A drive to the east against Poland or Hungary can be profitable, although the warlike nature of these peoples should not be underestimated. Beyond is the space to expand almost at will. To the west, the French may be distracted by war with England, a long running rivalry that can be exploited. In the north, the Danes will need careful watching, intent as they are on creating their own empire. To the south, the rich provinces of the Italian peninsular are a temptation, and the long-running dispute with the Pope as to the nature of Papal authority may require an army to occupy Rome, even if this results in a religious backlash."}
@{"Finally, no Emperor should overlook the possibilities for power presented by a Crusade. Nothing lasting may yet have been achieved in the Holy Lands by Crusaders, but who is to say what benefits might be available to a cunning ruler in the wake of such an adventure?"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ITALIAN_HIGH"]
@{"Italy is blessed with rich farmlands, skilled craftsmen and cunning merchants. It is also cursed by the presence of rich farmlands, skilled craftsmen and cunning merchants, or at least by the desire that this wealth provokes in others. Much of the wealth of western and northern Europe flows into and through Italy, into the coffers of the pope and the banking houses of the cities and money can be converted into both military and political clout. The Italians are also blessed with an adventurous and sometimes warlike nature, one that makes them difficult, even rebellious, subjects at times but worthwhile soldiers in times of war."}
@{"There are opportunities on all sides for a skilled and resolute Italian leader. To the northwest the French are likely to be concentrating on their rivalry with England, or looking to the east and more Crusades. To the north the Swiss are defiantly independent and good soldiers to boot. Beyond them the Empire can be a tempting target should it fall into disorder. To the east, the fading power of Byzantium is still something to be treated with respect, but that respect need not be as boundless as it was once. The Byzantines have many problems of their own and may not be able to hold what is currently theirs in the Balkans. To the far south lie the Islamic lands across the Mediterranean. Invasion there would be difficult, and it is a wise Italian prince who remembers that an invasion force can come from the most inconvenient direction. The seas also offer the chance of maritime greatness: profitable trade and warfare can go hand in hand at sea."}
@{"Papal authority may also not be as solid as it was once upon a time, but it's always worth remembering that Italy, the home of the Papacy, is a tempting target for a strong Emperor. Heretical thought has been growing for many years over some of the Church's more dubious practices, such as selling absolution for sins, not to mention the Church's ever-increasing wealth. In many cases, this heresy is no more than a desire to return to simpler, less worldly religious practices. But there are heretics in northern Italy and in France who represent more of a threat to the established order, the Cathars among them. Although it could be a terrible risk, carrying excommunication and damnation as the price of failure, an Italian ruler could exploit these religious differences to his own ends."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_POLISH_HIGH"]
@{"After a century of expansion profiting from the weakness of its neighbours and its strong relationship with the Empire and the Papacy, Poland remains potentially strong, at least for the moment. The Polish monarchy has managed to hold onto many of its relatively new possessions and Polish military strength has allowed resistance to the demands of the Empire as the power relationship changed."}
@{"The borders of the kingdom of Poland are not, however, set in stone: both opportunity and danger wait on all sides. Primogeniture - inheritance by the first-born - is not practiced in Poland, and the division of lands between children in every generation can make it hard to keep a kingdom intact; there is a tendency for the King to be the first among equals compared to the nobility. Even with these problems, the neighbouring petty principalities and dukedoms could fall before an aggressive, organised attack, and a cunning Polish King could take advantage of his smaller neighbours' weaknesses. All around are potentially rich pickings but all have risks, especially any expansionary move that will bring Poland into competition with Imperial power in Germany. The Russian princes to the east are less of a threat, but there are new threats beyond them. The steppe peoples are on the move once again, and a Polish ruler who does not keep an eye on Russian ambitions and the steppes is foolish indeed! Equally foolish is to ignore the intentions of the Holy Roman Emperor should his desire for land lead him to look at Polish territory."}
@{"The Catholic Church remains strong in Poland, and a useful tool for its kings to exploit, as there are pagans and Orthodox Christians to the east as rivals and (potential) enemies. The support of Mother Church can be relied upon, as there are still many places within reach of Polish arms where souls are ripe for salvation through conquest."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_RUSSIAN_HIGH"]
@{"Russia is a vast, hard land, hemmed in on one side by the relative might of Poland, and wide open on the other side, facing the endless steppes and whatever pagan barbarians emerge from the wilderness. Its winters are cruel, and its rulers in the city of Kiev are often the same. The princes of Kiev have withstood attacks by Bulgars, Pechenegs and Khazars, converted to the Orthodox faith and banished paganism from their lands. In defeating these enemies their military skills have been tested and proven, and new lands have been opened up thanks to those same warlike skills. Diplomatic finesse has also been present too: in the last century, the Kievan princes have sought links through marriage with ruling families in Norway, Hungary and even distant France. The Kievan Rus have also adopted the Orthodox faith without falling prey to excessive Greek influences from Byzantium."}
@{"The principality is, however, changing. Polish and German moves to the east mean that further expansion in that direction is likely to be difficult, but not necessarily impossible. Trade routes are also changing, although whether this is to Russia's profit or loss is yet to be become clear."}
@{"The princes of the Rus need to consider their options carefully. There are lands for the taking on many of their borders, but not all lands are equally valuable. The steppes are a land of huge distances and few villages. Looking to the west, Poland, Lithuania and Hungary lie across the shortest routes to central Europe. Along the Baltic coast, Danish ambitions may have to be countered, and to the south there is the imperial power of Byzantium to consider, and the growing power of the Turks, once steppe nomads and now a settled and civilized people."}
@{"Whatever a Russian prince decides, he needs to keep in mind the current crop of steppe nomads. The steppes seem to produce endless hosts of barbarians, and Russian lands are the first outposts of Orthodox Christianity against the pagan barbarians..."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_SPANISH_HIGH"]
@{"A century of warfare has not been enough to free all of Spain from its Almohad overlords and impose a new Catholic order on the country. The Kings of Spain still face a struggle to take all the lands south of the Pyrenees from their traditional blood enemies. It is true that there have been times of peace, but these have also been times of preparation for the next war and the next victory. The further expansion of Christian Spain rather than just its defence has taken on the air of a crusade for the Spanish, and the elimination of Islamic and non-Christian influences inside Spanish domains is now pursued with equal vigour."}
@{"Unless the infidels are driven from Spain, the Spanish will never feel entirely safe. Catholic Spain and Islamic Spain want the same land and the same souls, and Kings of Spain cannot and should not think of compromise. Intolerance is the policy of the state and the Church in Spanish lands, a means of securing loyalty through fear as well as faith."}
@{"Bringing Almohad lands into the Catholic fold may be greatness enough for some, but once it is done further expansion of the Spanish domain is possible. Any invasion into southern France is likely to be across rugged and inhospitable terrain, and this will require the nation's undivided attention. If the Almohads have not been defeated, too many men will be needed as garrisons to allow new conquests to be made, but successful warfare against the Almohads will also give the Spanish an experienced army, one that can be used for other conquests. With the French and English still locked in their long-running dispute and a rise in religiously inspired (and heretical) disloyalty in southern France, there is always the chance a Spanish kingdom with possessions to the north and south of the Pyrenees could be created, and perhaps even with lands in Italy as well."}
@{"There is, of course, always the chance to become involved in a Mediterranean struggle for new territory. Southern Italy can be vulnerable to invasion, especially if weakened by internal struggles, or if France or the Holy Roman Empire repeatedly invade the Italian peninsular from the north."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_TURKISH_HIGH"]
@{"In the last hundred years the warlike Turks have carved away many of the lands of the Byzantine Empire and made them their own. They can be justifiably proud of their martial tradition and skills that have taken them from being steppe warriors to becoming mighty Muslim princes. The Sultanate is now a real challenger to the power of Byzantium, and one that might well bring about the collapse of that ancient empire sooner rather than later. The ruling clan, the Seljuks, command armies that are both skilled and disciplined, the second quality being somewhat lacking in many Christian hosts. With their lands at the eastern end of the Mediterranean and towards the Black Sea, they now control the trading routes to the East and can tap the wealth that these generate. There are still disputes about the succession, but then the same could be said about any of the emerging nations of Europe and the Middle East."}
@{"The Turks are now a significant power in the eastern Mediterranean world. They dominate the approaches to the Holy Land and can draw on significant reserves of manpower for their armies. These hosts are far more disciplined than any Western army, well able to defend the sultanate's frontiers and push forward into disputed lands. These armies will be needed as Christian Crusaders remain a potent and seemingly irrational threat, and Byzantine encouragement of further Crusades is directly aimed at weakening Turkish power and influence. That the last of the Crusaders have been driven from the Holy Land (even though the Egyptian Sultan now rules there) should not be seen as proof that they cannot return to cause mischief. So a wise sultan keeps his armies ready for war, even when not contemplating immediate expansion."}
@{"The Turks, however, can afford to look beyond their immediate challenges and consider their ambitions for new territory. To the west, the Byzantine Empire stands as a shadow of its former greatness, but still a rival that will need to be crushed. Unless the Byzantines are swept aside, any Turkish expansion will be severely constrained. Once the Byzantines are driven back, a secure way to the Mediterranean world is also secured, and this means a sea-road to the lands beyond. Although there are still crusading fanatics to be considered, political reality may now mean that alliances with Christian princes in the west are now possible. They too have ambitions that can be harnessed for Turkish purposes. To the south are the fellow Muslims of Egypt, rivals in power even though they share the Islamic faith. The frontier with Egypt will have to be somewhere, and a sensible Turkish Sultan will make sure that it is as far south as possible."}



// Faction descriptions - Late Era

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ALMOHAD_LATE"]
@{"The Almohad Caliphate is not a playable faction when using this starting date for a game."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_BYZANTINE_LATE"]
@{"The last one hundred years have been both cruel and kind to the Byzantine Empire. The loss of Constantinople to the Latin Emperors - western, Catholic crusaders who treacherously turned on their fellow Orthodox Christians - marked the lowest point. The small "Byzantine" kingdom that survived this disaster looked like the very last flickering of Roman imperial power, and unlikely to stand for long before its many enemies. But victory, however improbable, can sometimes be snatched from the jaws of the most crushing defeat, and this is what has happened to the Byzantines! The Latin Emperors are gone, and once again an Orthodox Emperor rules in Byzantium. The Empire, however, is much reduced; its borders are closer to the city walls than they have ever been before."}
@{"The root cause of the crusaders' treachery was, of course, money. The wealth of Byzantium, even in these straightened circumstances, is still a matter of awe and wonder to many. Trade still passes through the city in abundance, even though the mercantile cities of northern Italy have taken much trade away. The city walls may no longer be completely impregnable, but they are still mighty. Byzantium might look like it is in the last stages of decline, but this is not necessarily the case: its armies could be mighty again, and wealth could once again flow in uncountable quantities."}
@{"The heirs of the Caesars still have a chance to renew their imperial glory. The Turks are still a threat, and fellow Christians can no longer be trusted as once seemed to be the case, but there is always the chance that another victory can be snatched, that the frontiers can be pushed back, and that Byzantium can live on more than just the memories of past glories. A bold Emperor can carve a new Empire out of the surrounding lands, and make his people great once more!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_DANISH_LATE"]
@{"For most of the last century, Danish rulers have done well in extending their power across the northern lands of Europe and around the shores of the Baltic. They have also done well not to be overwhelmed by Imperial power and end up as simply another unhappy province in the Holy Roman Empire. Their Viking heritage has been incorporated into a feudal realm that is the equal of any other Christian kingdom in honour and prestige. There have been setbacks under recent rulers, but there is still an underlying strength to the kingdom. The bleak lands of the north still produce fine warriors: the Varangian Guard in far-off Byzantium still has Norsemen in its ranks!"}
@{"Denmark's strategic position remains potentially strong. Denmark also has the chance to become a strong maritime nation, controlling the northern seas and gaining trade wealth: an "empire of the north" around the Baltic and North Seas is there for the taking. Much of the Baltic coast has now been incorporated in one or other of the larger kingdoms but there are still independent duchies and principalities to be conquered. If a rival kingdom is already embroiled in war, the Danes may be able to overrun a coastal province or two. This can bring the Danes into a confrontation with Poland, Russia and the Holy Roman Empire, as these kingdoms may be trying to hold or take these same lands."}
@{"Southern expansion into the rich provinces of central and western Germany is also an option for a strong Danish ruler, but one that must be carefully timed. It is a strategy that works well when Imperial authority is weakened or has already collapsed, but the resources of a strong Emperor will be great indeed. There are also ancient ties across the North Sea in England that could be exploited too, should that kingdom show signs of weakness. Before the current Norman royal family (descendants of Vikings themselves) took control, Danish blood ran through the veins of English Kings."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_EGYPTIAN_LATE"]
@{"Islamic Egypt has been blessed by the Nile. The homeland is a place where famine is rare; the great cities along the Nile are sophisticated, rich and among the oldest in the world. Thanks to merchants, knowledge and wealth have flowed into the cities in abundance. Learning is prized, from the old knowledge of the Romans and Greeks to the new wisdom of Arabia, India and the east."}
@{"The rulers of Egypt, too, value Islamic learning and culture, if a little indirectly. It is less than 50 years since the Mamluks, the slave soldiers of the Ayyubid dynasty of the mighty Saladin, overthrew their masters and became the new rulers of Egypt. The Mamluks were and are warriors, and they leave the day-to-day management of their lands to functionaries, content as long as taxes are raised to pay for military adventures. Warfare is their chief pursuit, and the Mamluks are very good at making war."}
@{"Mamluk Egypt's opportunities and problems are two sides of the same coin. Although Catholic princes still talk of crusades, there seems to be little to fear from that direction, although the rise of powerful Christian kingdoms should never be entirely ignored. To the west, the Almohads are a people in decline and face serious problems in Spain, but cornered men can often be dangerous as well as vulnerable. The Turks continue their steady, relentless advance against the Byzantine Empire and this may occupy their entire attention, perhaps allowing Egyptian gains along their borders. An alliance with the Byzantine Empire, for example, may also help keep the Turks' attentions on Constantinople rather than Cairo. Across the Mediterranean, an alliance with Catholic Spain is unlikely, but interests are equally unlikely to clash. However, growing Italian mercantile and maritime ambitions could well have to be countered."}
@{"With a little planning, and with Egypt's reliable military strength, there is much to look forward to as ruler of this domain. The wealth of the Mediterranean and much of the Islamic world is there for the taking!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ENGLISH_LATE"]
@{"Over the last century or so English kings have had mixed fortunes. The current ruler, Edward II, faces the hostility of the great nobles at every turn. Poorly considered disputes with the Papacy, fellow monarchs and great lords at home have all weakened the throne considerably. The English, for example, are a pious people and the Kings have suffered accordingly when going against papal authority. The Magna Carta has, in theory, made the King subject to the rule of law in the same way as his subjects, limiting his freedom to govern as he sees fit. England has also changed at the lower levels of society. A new class of petty landowners has come into being, the yeomen. There are still poor farmers, of course, but the yeomen have added greatly to the wealth of the country, and in parallel with their rising wealth they have greater expectations and pride in their new status. They are far less willing to submit meekly to their social betters, as once would have been the case. The loyalty of Englishmen and their willingness to pay taxes at the whim of the King can no longer be counted upon!"}
@{"Even with these concerns, England is wealthy and relatively well governed. The Welsh and Irish are, for the most part, safely subdued. Scotland remains the thorn in English flesh, one that will always need careful attention. All English Kings still hope for the uniting of the English and French crowns - worn, of course, by an Englishman. These ambitions are not as hopeless as they might seem for, although the old Angevin lands are gone, England may still have strength enough to conquer what her Kings claim in France. In turn, the French extend their claim of feudal sovereignty beyond the old English holdings in France to English holdings in England! It is not so many years since French soldiers harried the south coast of England. This continuing struggle for dominance with the French will need to be uppermost in any English ruler's mind, and guide his choice of allies."}
@{"Overall, the English position has promise. The strengths of the country have been ill served, under-used and squandered, but the potential for greatness under a strong leader is very real."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_FRENCH_LATE"]
@{"The last century has been kind to France. French Kings have become the masters in their own kingdom, put their government on a sound financial and administrative footing (something vital to the future health of the realm) and have developed a close relationship with the Papacy. Some would describe this as a domination of the Papacy, even though the Pope is not actually "imprisoned" on French soil. It was partly this influence that allowed the French monarchy to turn on the Knights Templar, accuse them of heresy, strip them of their accumulated wealth and lands and then destroy the crusading order, sending their Templars' Grand Master to the stake."}
@{"Rivalry with England is still central in all French policy, as it has to be to keep the English at bay and off-balance. Although related by marriage to the Kings of England, French rulers rightly have little love for their northern neighbours and treat them with suspicion and hostility, although this is sometimes cloaked beneath soft words! The English would still like to recover their former lands in France; the French cannot allow this, as they would be tenants in their own homes if such a disaster came to pass. To the south, there is the chance to meddle in the affairs of Italy and Spain: driving out the Muslims could easily allow new French possessions beyond the Pyrenees if the Spanish grow careless. To the east and in Italy the Holy Roman Empire is both a threat and an opportunity. A misstep by the Emperor may allow the French to expand their possessions; a strong Emperor bears careful watching."}
@{"In short then, France's position in the world is enviable: its farmlands are rich, its merchants wealthy, its monarchy secure and strong, its royal armies valorous and unmatched in honour. A wise ruler knows to allow for contingencies and secure his own lands before coveting new possessions, but the prospects for the future are excellent."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_GERMAN_LATE"]
@{"Over the last century the Holy Roman Emperors have been remarkable and insignificant in turn. One Emperor managed to get himself excommunicated no fewer than three times, was crowned King of Jerusalem (against the wishes of the Church), "forgot" his promises to go on Crusades, and even made an alliance with the Islamic Egypt! For nineteen years there were two Emperors, both so unimportant that the throne had to be considered empty. But most importantly of all, there has been an end to the Hohenstaufen dynasty and the Hapsburgs are the new Imperial family."}
@{"The Hapsburgs' holdings and family connections are what now give strength to the title of Emperor. The family are masters at the art of dynastic marriage: few opportunities to extend Hapsburg lands by treaty and marriage are ever ignored! And the lands they gain are held and rarely allowed to leave family control. The Holy Roman Empire may not have the power that it once possessed, but the Hapsburg Emperor is a powerful man in Europe. His lands, wealth and armies are the envy of other monarchs. Even the disapproval of the French-influenced Papacy has not been enough to cause him problems."}
@{"Disloyalty still plagues the Empire as its principalities, duchies and free cities all pursue their own policies, but a strong Emperor can overcome these obstacles. In central Europe there are lands to be secured against regional rebels. As long as the homelands of the Empire are secure, there are opportunities for war and diplomacy on all sides. French, Danish, Polish, Hungarian, and Italian lands can all be taken, provided that the other powers can be neutralised at least for the duration of a successful war. A sensible Emperor should always bear in mind that fighting on two borders at once means that Imperial power is, by definition, split. Imperial power, when it can be used against a single target, is crushing. And as long as Imperial diplomacy can keep enemies from uniting, military power can be used in just this fashion."}
@{"Finally, no Emperor should overlook opportunities for lasting alliances with kingdoms beyond his immediate neighbours. A counter-strategy of surrounding rivals by alliances or blood-relatives can be very successful in extending Hapsburg and Imperial influence."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_ITALIAN_LATE"]
@{"Italy is fortunate to have rich farmlands, skilled and industrious craftsmen and profit-hungry merchants. Much of Europe's wealth flows through Italian mercantile houses that are among the cleverest and most sophisticated in Europe. Italian cities are richer than almost any other Christian towns, rivalling Islamic cities (on a modest scale) with their culture and magnificence. In turn, this wealth is readily converted into political and military power. The Italians are an adventurous and occasionally warlike people: rebellious subjects at times but worthwhile soldiers in times of war."}
@{"There are opportunities and perils in unequal measure on all sides for a skilled and resolute Italian leader. To the northwest the French are likely to be concentrating on their rivalry with England. To the north the Swiss are defiantly independent, good soldiers and a valuable buffer against the Empire. Rome, of course, is the natural home of the Papacy, and this may make Italy a route for invasion by other powers intent on using military force for religious ends - Popes tend to be compliant when surrounded! To the east, Byzantium should still be treated with caution, but the days of automatic respect and awe are probably over, unless a strong Emperor emerges in Constantinople. The Byzantines have many problems of their own and may leave chances for an Italian domain to expand. To the south lie the Islamic domains on the far shore of the Mediterranean. Invasion in either direction would be difficult, but it is a wise Italian prince who remembers that an invasion force can come from the most inconvenient direction. But the seas also offer the chance of maritime greatness: profitable trade and warfare go hand in hand at sea."}
@{"Religion and politics also go hand in hand, and a resolute Italian leader may be able to exploit the confusion and problems in the Catholic Church. This could be a terrible risk, however, carrying excommunication and damnation as the price of failure!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_POLISH_LATE"]
@{"Poland has survived a century of terrible dangers, none more terrible than the attack of the Mongols in 1241. An army of Polish and Teutonic knights was crushed, and the land was spared only when the Mongols miraculously turned, thanks to the death of their ruler through over-indulgence. Fortunately, these ravening monsters from the steppes have not attacked again. Instead, the Poles have been faced with threats from a different direction, as the Teutonic Knights have continued to push against their borders, into lands that Poles have good cause to see as Polish."}
@{"The Catholic Church remains strong in Poland, a useful unifying force for any king to use. Heretics have a habit of arising in Bohemia and nearby lands, and there are Orthodox lands to the south and east, the homes of potential enemies. The support of Mother Church can generally be relied on in any attempts to bring these souls to true salvation via the sword."}
@{"Poland's borders have changed many times, as lands have been won and then allowed to slip away. Polish kings have lost few opportunities when taking advantage of their neighbours' weaknesses, even as the Teutonic Order has advanced from the west. Behind the Teutonic Order, of course, lie the ambitions of the Holy Roman Emperor. If these can be countered successfully, a warlike and resolute Polish king can still take advantage of his smaller neighbours' weaknesses. The Russian Princes are not, as yet, equals of Poland's monarchy and a move to crush them could be successful, if costly. It is, however, foolish is to ignore the intentions of the Holy Roman Emperor. To the west, the Empire remains a notional structure rather than a royal state in many respects, and one that may be vulnerable. A wrongly timed attack will, naturally, bring down the full wrath of the Emperor."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_RUSSIAN_LATE"]
@{"Russia is a land emerging from the empty spaces and vast forests of the steppes, and its borders are far from established. Its winters and rulers are cruel, making this a hard land of tough men. Space and distance make Russia a very different place from the kingdoms of the west, as does the Russian need to keep the steppe nomads at bay by whatever means necessary - prudent military preparations on the one hand, and bowing to the authority of the Mongol Khans on the other. As long as the Khans are given respect, Princes in Vladimir have a free hand to pursue their own ambitions."}
@{"The Orthodox Church has managed to stay distinctively Russian, making it another source of strength for the Grand Princes. This support has allowed them to move from Kiev to Vladimir as the former city has lost its trading importance. Russia is now ruled from Vladimir, but Moscow could easily be the next seat of royal government if trade patterns continue to change. But Russia is not yet a European kingdom, no matter how much its rulers may want it to be. Russia is Russia: huge, forbidding, empty, and dangerous."}
@{"Looking to the west, Poland, Lithuania and Hungary lie across the shortest routes to central Europe. Along the Baltic coast, Danish and Teutonic ambitions may have to be countered. This is true more than 80 years after Alexander Nevsky defeated the Teutonic Knights and their Scandinavian allies in battle. But Polish and German moves to the east may bring opportunities, if these kingdoms overextend their advance. To the south there is the fading imperial power of Byzantium and the growing power of the Turkish sultanate. And there are always the steppes, the endless lands to the east, although this may mean that the Tartars have to be faced."}
@{"Whatever a Russian Prince decides to do, he needs to remember the steppes and the endless hosts of steppe nomads that seem to come out of them. Russian lands are the first outposts of Orthodox Christianity in the struggle against these monstrous pagans..."}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_SPANISH_LATE"]
@{"Centuries of warfare have not yet been enough to free all of Spain from its Moorish overlords and impose Catholic order on the country. In the far south, a few die-hard Muslims remain unconquered. In the other parts of the land, there is also much work to do in rooting out the vestiges of Islamic influence - not everyone who claims to love the Church does so with the right degree of fervour, and so the Christian Kings of Spain still fight to free their lands from their blood enemies. Times of peace have been the lull before the storm. Until the remaining Muslims are driven from the Iberian peninsular, the Spanish will never feel safe. Catholic Spain has what it considers to be a divine mission to save not just the land, but also the souls of the people, and there can be no rest until the final victory is won."}
@{"Bringing Muslim lands into the Catholic fold may be worthwhile enough for some lords, but once this has been done, there are new possessions to attract the eye of any King of Spain. There is always a chance to become involved in a Mediterranean policy for acquiring new territory. Southern Italy can be vulnerable to invasion, especially if weakened by internal struggles, or if France or the Empire have invaded repeatedly from the north."}
@{"An alliance with the Holy Roman Empire can leave France surrounded and vulnerable, especially if the French are preoccupied with English entanglements. Southern France is a very different country from the north, and may accept a Spanish monarch - if the invasion can be pulled off successfully! And, finally, no King of Spain should ever forget the dynastic possibilities of marriage as a way of forming ties with almost any kingdom. As well as giving Spain claims to new lands, such links can provide allies for all kinds of adventures!"}

@["FSM_faction_info_faction_TURKISH_LATE"]
@{"In the last hundred years the warlike Turks have carved their way into the remaining Byzantine lands and made them their own. It would be wrong, however, to think that the Turks have been a unified force. The ruling clan, the Seljuks, has been challenged and supplanted by a new group, the Ottomans, under their dynamic leader Osman. He has attracted many to his banner and expanded Turkish lands on his own account. The Turks, no matter who rules them, continue to sit astride the most important trade routes to the Far East and thus profit from the merchants passing through their lands."}
@{"Turkish armies remain skilled and resolute in warfare, and a good deal more reliable and disciplined than many Christian troops (although the best Christian soldiers are probably a match for them). They can be justifiably proud of the martial traditions that have taken them from being steppe warriors to becoming mighty sultans. The Turks can draw on significant manpower for their armies, and should be well able to defend their possessions and push forward into disputed lands."}
@{"The Sultanate is the best placed candidate to be the destroyer of Byzantine hopes, the power that will one day bring about the final collapse of Byzantium. A wise Sultan, however, will know better than to make any such assumption, as the Byzantine Empire has weathered many crises. The Turks may be the significant power at the eastern end of the Mediterranean, but they have other enemies who would be happy to see them fail. The Islamic Mamluk military elite now rules in Egypt with plans for its own martial glory and expansion. The Turkish Sultan should keep his armies ready for defence as well as attack, and makes sure that his borders are as far to the south as possible!"}
@{"The Turks are lucky in that they can afford to plan ahead, knowing that time and accumulating wealth are their allies. The Byzantine Empire is a shadow of greatness, and beyond it are the rich pickings of Europe and the Mediterranean. It may even be possible to find Christian allies to help any advance into the Balkans. Christian princes may still profess obedience to their Church, but a certain knowing pragmatism now governs diplomacy, and this is something a powerful Sultan could use to his own benefit."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_REBEL"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}




["FSM_faction_info_faction_ARAGONESE"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_BURGUNDIAN"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_GOLDEN_HORDE"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_HUNGARIAN"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_NOVGOROD"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_PAPIST"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_SICILIAN"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}



["FSM_faction_info_faction_SWISS"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}




["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_1"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_2"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_3"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}


						             
["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_4"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}


						             
["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_5"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_6"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_7"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_8"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}


						             
["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_9"] 
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_10"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}
						             


["FSM_faction_info_faction_EXTRA_11"]
{"This faction is not playable during this period of the game."}


//*******************************************************************************************************
//*******************************************************************************************************
//
//	MEDIEVAL ADDON TEXT BEGINS HERE:
//
//*******************************************************************************************************
//*******************************************************************************************************

["Loading Production Files"]
{"Loading Production Files"}

@["Era_description_VIKING"]
@{"In 793AD Britain is not a country. It is not even an idea of a country yet. It is a patchwork of competing petty kingdoms, left behind after the departure of the last of Rome's Legions."}
@{"The Roman Empire didn't fall in Britain; it packed up and went home leaving the locals to sort out their own problems. In 410AD the Emperor Honorius sent the Romano-British a polite letter telling them to "look to their own defences". This was the only help he could offer to defend against the invading Saxons. A hundred years earlier, the last of the truly great Emperors, Constantine, had been proclaimed Emperor in northern Britannia at Eboracum. But now Britannia and its people were truly alone in a hostile world. The distant corners of the British Isles had never even been part of the Empire: Ireland and most of what would be Scotland had never been under Roman authority."} 
@{"The Romano-British did their best to thrive, of course, but the Roman province fragmented and then split again into small kingdoms under pressure from invaders and local warlords. Saxons from the European mainland took much of the south coastal region, completely overrunning the Roman forts of the "Saxon Shore" that were supposed to keep them out. Under semi-legendary leaders like King Arthur the Britons fought back, but the Anglo-Saxons were in Britain to stay. Even Christianity withered as Roman Britain was forgotten and overrun, pushed aside by pagan gods. Invaders didn't just come from the east, either. The Picts in the far north were driven inland by Scots clans from Ireland."}
@{"The re-invasion by Christianity took time. The Pope sent missionaries, but each king in turn had to be persuaded and converted. In the meantime, by 600 around half of Britain was ruled by Anglo-Saxon kings, and they claimed to be overlords of much of the rest. The time was one when warlords could thrive, extending their kingdoms at the expense of neighbours who would then hold a grudge forever, if not slightly longer! From time to time a warlord arose who was powerful enough to be recognised as the Bretwalda, the High King of Britain, but this was merely a title rather than the reality of power."}
@{"But not all was grim: by late 700s the great King of Mercia, Offa, not only built a huge earthwork to keep the Welsh at bay, but also minted the first coins seen since the Romans departed. He was a king as mighty as any in Europe."} 
@{"But there was a cloud on the horizon, over the icy eastern seas."}
@{"By any standards, the year of Our Lord 793 did not begin well for the king and people of Northumbria, the northern neighbours to Mercia. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle reported events many years later: there were terrible portents that miserably frightened the people. Lightning, storms and "fiery dragons" were seen in the skies. Then famine struck, and the people weakened, sickened and died. They must have felt that God's Grace had passed them by for some reason."}
@{"The year showed few signs of getting better when, in early summer, a new devilry appeared. From out of the east a new threat came to them, axe-armed and savage, in dragon-carved ships; rapacious "wolves among sheep" - the Vikings!"}
@{"These few raiders fell upon the monastery at Lindisfarne, one of the oldest centres of Christian learning in northern Europe and, having slaughtered the monks, took all the treasures they could carry and vanished back out to sea."}
@{"They would be back in greater numbers. And Britain would never be the same again."}

//*******************************************************************************************************
//*******************************************************************************************************
//
//	Text added after 7th Jan 2003 begins here:
//
//*******************************************************************************************************
//*******************************************************************************************************


SetShowTransOff  // Do not translate.
//???? Remove when localised.

